DC API: Always use Origin for binding response (#448)
openid/OpenID4VP: openid-4-verifiable-presentations-1_0.md

* `x509_san_dns`: When the Client Identifier Scheme is `x509_san_dns`, the Client Identifier MUST be a DNS name and match a `dNSName` Subject Alternative Name (SAN) [@!RFC5280] entry in the leaf certificate passed with the request. The request MUST be signed with the private key corresponding to the public key in the leaf X.509 certificate of the certificate chain added to the request in the `x5c` JOSE header [@!RFC7515] of the signed request object. The Wallet MUST validate the signature and the trust chain of the X.509 certificate. All Verifier metadata other than the public key MUST be obtained from the `client_metadata` parameter. If the Wallet can establish trust in the Client Identifier authenticated through the certificate, e.g. because the Client Identifier is contained in a list of trusted Client Identifiers, it may allow the client to freely choose the `redirect_uri` value. If not, the FQDN of the `redirect_uri` value MUST match the Client Identifier without the prefix `x509_san_dns:`. Example Client Identifier: `x509_san_dns:client.example.org`.

> * `origin`: This Client Identifier Scheme is defined in (#dc_api_request). The Wallet MUST NOT accept this Client Identifier Scheme in requests - it is only used in responses.

Reviewer: Shouldn't we remove this whole section?
```suggestion
```

> 
> * `origin`: This Client Identifier Scheme is defined in (#dc_api_request). The Wallet MUST NOT accept this Client Identifier Scheme in requests - it is only used in responses.

Reviewer: Shouldn't we remove this whole section? This is not about a client_id anymore - we are just changing what to put into aud for DC API?
```suggestion
```

Author: @c2bo I did wonder about that, but it's defined that what goes into `aud` is the client_id, and we're back to the problem of putting something into client_id that I think we need to be clear if it was intended for a client that authenticated using federation (+ custom url schemes) or one authenticated using just web PKI (+ DC API), for the same reasons we originally put the client id scheme into the `aud` - there's no other way for clients to tell the difference between those two types of responses.

Or to put another way, we are defining a meaning for 'origin' client id scheme in the response, so it's important that people don't define an `origin` client id scheme that means something different, hence retaining the definition in the client id scheme section as it would eventually need to be registered in any future IANA registry of client id schemes.

If Federation was always prefixed (with something other than "https://") then I think using just the url would make sense.

Reviewer 2: The alternative to say that in OID4VC over DC API, the audience of the credential presentation is the origin of the request and not the client identifier. That would require us to clearly split the spec in the "traditional" and the "DC" part including all security considerations.

Reviewer: That feels like the better/cleaner approach to me, but a pretty big change - especially given the current timelines

Author: @tlodderstedt 
> The alternative to say that in OID4VC over DC API, the audience of the credential presentation is the origin of the request and not the client identifier. That would require us to clearly split the spec in the "traditional" and the "DC" part including all security considerations.

I don't think we  really have a defined concept of the "audience of the credential presentation" in our credential format profiles though - we'd have to either introduce that concept, or have separate text for "traditional" versus "DC" in the credential format profiles too.

Reviewer 3: > I don't think we really have a defined concept of the "audience of the credential presentation"

why? we do use a term `audience (the Client Identifier of the Verifier)` in the spec already.

> That feels like the better/cleaner approach to me, but a pretty big change - especially given the current timelines

as an option, we could merge this PR and do this as part of a PR addressing #453 ? (cc @awoie )

Reviewer 3: so basically, we want the aud value to be prefixed with `origin:`, right? (to basically prevent the attacks that made us turn client id scheme parameter into a prefix in the first place). in which case, i agree it makes sense to keep this, but I would like to see more explanation that just `The Wallet MUST NOT accept this Client Identifier Scheme in requests - it is only used in responses.` something like 

> The Wallet MUST NOT accept this Client Identifier Scheme in requests - it is only used in responses.  `aud` claims of the Verifiable Presentation MUST be the origin value prefixed with `origin:`

Author: I've added a sentence of explanation like @Sakurann suggested.

> * `origin`: This Client Identifier Scheme is defined in (#dc_api_request). The Wallet MUST NOT accept this Client Identifier Scheme in requests. In OpenID4VP over the Digital Credentials API the audience of the Credential Presentation is the origin value prefixed by `origin:`, for example `origin:https://verifier.example.com/`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `origin`: This Client Identifier Scheme is defined in (#dc_api_request). The Wallet MUST NOT accept this Client Identifier Scheme in requests. In OpenID4VP over the Digital Credentials API, the audience of the Credential Presentation is always the origin value prefixed by `origin:`, for example `origin:https://verifier.example.com/`.
```

> * `origin`: This Client Identifier Scheme is defined in (#dc_api_request). The Wallet MUST NOT accept this Client Identifier Scheme in requests. In OpenID4VP over the Digital Credentials API, the audience of the Credential Presentation is always the origin value prefixed by `origin:`, for example `origin:https://verifier.example.com/`.

Reviewer 2: Do we still need this scheme?

Reviewer: I brought up the same question before (https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VP/pull/448#discussion_r1984999561) and this seems to be more of a placeholder so nobody use that as a scheme. It is technically not a real client id scheme (cannot be used in the request), but blocked for the response.

I don't really like it but I guess this is fine?

Author: Yes, what Christian said - client id schemes are basically defining prefixes to be used in two places:

1. The client id parameter
2. The `aud` value in responses

The `origin:` prefix is definitely used in "2" so I think to avoid any potential for future confusion it should be a "registered" client id scheme.

* `transaction_data`
* `dcql_query`

> The `client_id` parameter MUST be omitted in unsigned requests defined in (#unsigned_request). The Wallet MUST ignore any `client_id` parameter that is present in an unsigned request.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `client_id` parameter MUST be omitted in unsigned requests defined in (#unsigned_request). The Wallet MUST ignore any `client_id` parameter that is present in an unsigned request.

In signed requests, `client_id` parameter MUST be present, as it governs Client Identifier Scheme specific handling of the request.
```
 this one sentence would prevent confusion i had...

Author: Edited slightly for consistency with the sentence about unsigned and to try and be clearer on the reason:

```suggestion
The `client_id` parameter MUST be omitted in unsigned requests defined in (#unsigned_request). The Wallet MUST ignore any `client_id` parameter that is present in an unsigned request.

The `client_id` parameter MUST be present in signed requests defined in (#signed_request), as it communicates to the wallet which Client Identifier Scheme and Client Identifier to use when verifying the request signature or retrieving client metadata.
```

* `transaction_data`
* `dcql_query`

The `client_id` parameter MUST be omitted in unsigned requests defined in (#unsigned_request). The Wallet MUST ignore any `client_id` parameter that is present in an unsigned request.

> The `client_id` parameter MUST be present in signed requests defined in (#signed_request), as it communicates to the wallet which Client Identifier Scheme and Client Identifier to use when verifying the request signature or retrieving client metadata.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `client_id` parameter MUST be present in signed requests defined in (#signed_request), as it communicates to the wallet which Client Identifier Scheme and Client Identifier to use when authenticating the client through verification of the request signature or retrieving client metadata.
```

Author: Thanks Torsten - applied that change!

* `transaction_data`
* `dcql_query`

> The `client_id` parameter MUST be omitted in unsigned requests defined in (#unsigned_request). The Wallet MUST ignore any `client_id` parameter that is present in an unsigned request. The security properties that are normally provided by the Client Identifier are achieved by binding the response to the Origin it was received from. The transport of the request and Origin to the Wallet is platform-specific and is out of scope of OpenID4VP over the W3C Digital Credentials API.

Reviewer 3: Didn't we agree that client_id is omitted from signed requests too? so `client_id` needs to be removed from line 2045 too

```suggestion
The Wallet MUST ignore any `client_id` parameter that is present in either signed and unsigned requests. The security properties that are normally provided by the Client Identifier are achieved by binding the response to the Origin it was received from. The transport of the request and Origin to the Wallet is platform-specific and is out of scope of OpenID4VP over the W3C Digital Credentials API.
```

Reviewer: client_id is omitted for the response, not the request for signed requests

Author: Agree with Christian, we didn't agree to omit from signed requests, and client_id in signed requests is required to know how to verify the signature (it tells you how to find the key etc) so we can't omit it.

Reviewer 2: exactly. We don't want to change the signed request payload (as it governs the handling of the client id scheme specific credential). We drop the idea to use the client id as audience in the credential presentation and use the origin instead.

Reviewer 3: ah ok, got it - thanks for clarifying

The signed request allows the Wallet to authenticate the Verifier using a trust framework other than the Web PKI utilized by the browser. An example of such a trust framework is the Verifier (RP) management infrastructure set up in the context of the eIDAS regulation in the European Union, in which case, the Wallet can no longer rely only on the Origin of the Verifier. This Origin MAY still be used to further strengthen the security of the flow. The external trust framework could, for example, map the Client Identifier to registered Origins.

## Response {#dc_api_response}

Every OpenID4VP Authorization Request results in a response being provided through the Digital Credentials API (DC API). The response is an instance of the `DigitalCredential` interface, as defined in [@!W3C.Digital_Credentials_API], and the OpenID4VP Authorization Response parameters as defined for the Response Type are represented as an object within the `data` attribute.

> In places where the Client Identifier would be used in the response (for example, the `aud` value in a Key Binding JWT), the Origin MUST be used instead, prefixed with `origin:`.

Reviewer 2: This should go into a general description of the DC API profile. Here I would mention that client ids with authentication credentials can go into the request, but only for authentication/authorization purposes. The audience of the credential presentation is not affected by any of those client ids.

Reviewer 3: agreed. made suggestion above

Author: I've written this text and added an explicit sentence about explaining the audience isn't affected by the client id in the request.

The signed request allows the Wallet to authenticate the Verifier using a trust framework other than the Web PKI utilized by the browser. An example of such a trust framework is the Verifier (RP) management infrastructure set up in the context of the eIDAS regulation in the European Union, in which case, the Wallet can no longer rely only on the Origin of the Verifier. This Origin MAY still be used to further strengthen the security of the flow. The external trust framework could, for example, map the Client Identifier to registered Origins.

## Response {#dc_api_response}

Every OpenID4VP Authorization Request results in a response being provided through the Digital Credentials API (DC API). The response is an instance of the `DigitalCredential` interface, as defined in [@!W3C.Digital_Credentials_API], and the OpenID4VP Authorization Response parameters as defined for the Response Type are represented as an object within the `data` attribute.

The security properties that are normally provided by the Client Identifier are achieved by binding the response to the Origin it was received from.

> The audience for the response (for example, the `aud` value in a Key Binding JWT) MUST be the Origin, prefixed with `origin:`. This is the case even for signed requests - when using OpenID4VP over the DC API the Client Identifier is never used as the audience for the response.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The audience for the response (for example, the `aud` value in a Key Binding JWT) MUST be the Origin, prefixed with `origin:`, for example `origin:https://verifier.example.com/`. This is the case even for signed requests. Therefore, when using OpenID4VP over the DC API, the Client Identifier is not used as the audience for the response.
```

The following requirements apply to the `nonce` and `aud` claims of the Verifiable Presentation:

- the `nonce` claim MUST be the value of `nonce` from the Authorization Request;

> - the `aud` claim MUST be the value of the Client Identifier; or for a request over the DC API MUST be the Origin prefixed with `origin:`, as described in (#dc_api_response).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- the `aud` claim MUST be the value of the Client Identifier. For a request over the DC API, it MUST be the Origin prefixed with `origin:`, as described in (#dc_api_response).
```

Author: I think we do need the "or" or some other way to make clearer that the first sentence doesn't always apply:

```suggestion
- the `aud` claim MUST be the value of the Client Identifier, except for requests over the DC API where it MUST be the Origin prefixed with `origin:`, as described in (#dc_api_response).
```

The following requirements apply to the `challenge` and `domain` claims within the `proof` object in the Verifiable Presentation:

- the `challenge` claim MUST be the value of `nonce` from the Authorization Request;

> - the `domain` claim MUST be the value of the Client Identifier; or for a request over the DC API MUST be the Origin prefixed with `origin:`, as described in (#dc_api_response).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- the `domain` claim MUST be the value of the Client Identifier. For a request over the DC API, it MUST be the Origin prefixed with `origin:`, as described in (#dc_api_response).
```

The following requirements apply to the `nonce` and `aud` claims in the Key Binding JWT:

- the `nonce` claim MUST be the value of `nonce` from the Authorization Request;

> - the `aud` claim MUST be the value of the Client Identifier; or for a request over the DC API MUST be the Origin prefixed with `origin:`, as described in (#dc_api_response).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- the `aud` claim MUST be the value of the Client Identifier; For a request over the DC API, it MUST be the Origin prefixed with `origin:`, as described in (#dc_api_response).
```

Author: ```suggestion
- the `aud` claim MUST be the value of the Client Identifier, except for requests over the DC API where it MUST be the Origin prefixed with `origin:`, as described in (#dc_api_response).
```

   
   * clarify DCQL case of `claims` and `claim_sets` being absent
   * add language on client ID and nonce binding for ISO mdocs and W3C VCs

>    * for DC API, always use Origin for binding the response (e.g. in Key Binding JWT `aud`)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   * for DC API, omit client_id from the request and always use Origin for binding the response (e.g. in Key Binding JWT `aud` and sessionTranscript in mdoc)
```

Author: As noted somewhere else, `client_id` is still in the request - committing the other part of your suggestion though:

```suggestion
   * for DC API, always use Origin for binding the response (e.g. in Key Binding JWT `aud` and sessionTranscript in mdoc)
```
